
Construction of the circumscribed circle of an arbitrary triangle

Moti Ben-Ari

Given an arbitrary triangle, its circumscribed circle can be constructed using a straightedge and compass. The three perpendicular bisectors of its sides intersect in a single point which is the center of the circumscribed circle. The example uses the TikZ libraries "intersections" and "through" to closely imitate the geometric construction, starting from an arbitrary triangle.


Intersection of the medians of an arbitrary triangle

Moti Ben-Ari

Given an arbitrary triangle, its three medians intersect in a single point. The intersection divides each median in the ratio 2:1. The construction uses "partway modifiers" to locate the midpoint of each side of the triangle and then the library "intersections". The lengths are computed and displayed using \pgfmathparse.


Ramanujan's construction of 355/113, an approximation to pi

Moti Ben-Ari

With a straightedge and compass it is possible to construct any real number that can be obtained from the integers using the four arithmetic operators +, -, *, / and square roots, and only these numbers can be constructed. Therefore, the value of pi cannot be constructed because it is a transcendental number.

355/113 = 3.14159292 is an excellent approximation which differs from pi only in the seventh decimal place. A naive construction of 355/113 would take hundreds of steps. Ramanujan found a clever construction, published in The Journal of the Indian Mathematical Society, 1913, p. 138.  https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Squaring_the_circle.

This example follows Ramanujan's construction using the TikZ libraries "intersections", "through", "calc". Each line segment is labeled with its length (calculated offline).


Ptolemy's theorem on quadrilaterals circumscribed by a circle

Moti Ben-Ari

Theorem (Ptolemy): Let Q a quadrilateral circumscribed by a circle,  let its two pairs of opposite sides be (a, b) and (c, d), and let its diagnonals be (e, f). Then ef = ab + cd.

The Mohr-Mascheroni Theorem shows that any construction that can be done with straightedge and compass can be done with a compass only! One proof of this theorem uses Ptolemy's theorem.

TikZ features include name path, intersection, circle through, distance modifier, let...in, \pgfmathparse.
